





# The SDK Palette

## What the palette looks like now

The [Palette](https://developer.ubuntu.com/api/apps/qml/sdk-15.04.1/Ubuntu.Components.Themes.Palette/) has been in need of some updating for some time and
we’ve been working hard behind the scenes to update this for OTA 10. We’ve
stripped back the palette and rebuilt it from the ground up, considering every
aspect as we went along.

Below is an introduction to how the palette is constructed and how we apply it
to components in the UI toolkit. The majority of the elements are coming with
OTA 10 release, and we will point out those which will come with OTA 11
explicitly.

## How the palette is constructed

  * Colour set

  * Theme

  * Palette value

  * Palette value sets

### The Ubuntu color set

The colors in the color set are the foundation of the palette. However these
values or names should never be hardcoded into any component as this will lead
to conflicts and misrepresentation of color when other themes will be used.
These colors are defined in UbuntuColors singleton.

**Colour name**

**Colour values**

**Colour example**

Jet

#111111

Inkstone

#3B3B3B

Slate

#5D5D5D

Graphite

#666666

Ash

#888888

Silk

#CDCDCD

Porcelain

#F7F7F7

Blue

#19B6EE

Green

#3EB34F

Red

#ED3146

Orange

#E95420

### The theme

The theme is the visual look of the UI components. There are two themes which
come with the SDK, Ambiance (light) and Suru Dark (dark). The colors a
component is painted with depend on the theme chosen by the developer.

### Palette values

These are the normal color values given to a specific component. Each palette
value name has a semantic meaning and is applied on a certain layer within the
application UI.

There are three layers in an Ubuntu UI and those are the following:

  1. background - the base layer where the application window resides

  2. foreground - a layer above the base, holding components brought into foreground

  3. overlay - a layer floating above background, mostly contains popups and dialogs

There are also 2 sub layers which can sit on top of any of these main layers.
These are:

  1. base - sits flat on the surface of any main layer.

  2. raised - sits proud but not detached from the surface of any main layer.

![](/static/devportal_uploaded/a09be0f5-de6e-44c1-8ce1-ea202e1d2c83-cms_page_media/1130/palette-diagram-02.png)

In addition to these there are palette values which are not applied on any
particular layer, but mostly color a section of a component. Those will be
described in the following chapters in more details.

Each palette value follows the UI layer it is applied in, and each of them has
at least one palette value suffixed with “Text”, which defines the color value
to be used when drawing on the base color or putting a text above it.

Rectangle {

color: theme.palette.normal.**base**

border {

width: 3

color: theme.palette.normal.**baseText**

}

Text {

text: “Hello world”

anchors.centerIn: parent

horizontalAlignment: Text.AlignHCenter

color: theme.palette.normal.**baseText**

}

}

![](/static/devportal_uploaded/5e89e3e4-9330-4106-b880-34c54eac3f6d-cms_page_media/1130/s2EIHgTuUJ0fGllaUmM0duw.png)

####  Background

These are the colors applied to the bottom level (or background) of the
application.

**Background**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.background

White

Jet

.backgroundText

Jet

White

.backgroundSecondaryText

Slate

Silk

.backgroundTertiaryText

Ash

Ash

.backgroundPositiveText

Green

Green

.backgroundNegativeText

Red

Red

#### Base

These are the colors applied to elements that sit flat on the main layers. For
example the outline of a text field or the bar of the slider.

**Base**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.base

Silk

Graphite

.baseText

Ash

Ash

#### Foreground

These are the colors applied to components that sit on top of the background
layer. For example the background of a neutral button.

**Foreground**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.foreground

Porcelain

Inkstone

.foregroundText

Jet

White

#### Raised

These are the colors applied to elements that are raised above the main
layers. For example the thumb toggles for sliders and switches.

**Raised**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.raised

White

White

.raisedText

Slate

Slate

.raisedSecondaryText

Silk

Silk

#### Overlay

These are the colors applied to elements that float above the background
layer. For example popovers, dialogs and menus.

**Overlay**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.overlay

White

Inkstone

.overlayText

Slate

white

.overlaySecondaryText

Silk

Slate

#### Selection

These are the colors applied to components that have selected content. This
should not be confused with the entire component’s selected state. For example
text in an editable text field.

**Selection**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.selection

Blue (20% opacity)

Blue (40% opacity)

.selectionText

Jet

White

#### Field

These are the colors applied to the background of input controls . For example
the background of a text field, checkbox or radio button.

**Field**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.field

White

Jet

.fieldText

Jet

White

Positive

These are the colors applied to positive actions. For example a positive
button.

**Positive**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.positive

Green

Green

.positiveText

White

White

#### Negative

These are the colors applied to negative actions. For example a negative
button.

**Negative**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.negative

Red

Red

.negativeText

White

White

#### Activity

These are the colors applied to active items. For example the indication of
progress on a progress bar or a slider.

**Activity**

**Ambiance**

**Suru Dark**

.activity

Blue

Blue

.activityText

White

White

### Palette value sets

In addition to the palette values above, an item can have a value set to
control the look of the item as it enters or leaves a state. The defined value
sets are:

  * theme.palette.disabled

  * theme.palette.normal

  * theme.palette.highlighted

  * theme.palette.focused

  * theme.palette.selected

  * theme.palette.selectedDisabled

Each value set contains the color value for each of the color names listed
above.

Note: the focused value set will land in OTA11.

## How we define the color of an item

Each item is considered to have different states, though not specified
explicitly through a given property or enumeration.

For instance an _Item_ as well as a _StyledItem_ in most of the cases is in
__normal state__, being in normal use. This state is represented by the
**enabled** property. This property can already drive the normal and
__disabled state__. Now, a component can be __focused__ or not, which is
driven through the **activeFocus** and **keyNavigationFocus** for the
_StyledItem_.

Some items which react on mouse or touch interaction, have a property that
drives the __highlighted state__ of the component, for example,
_AbstractButton_ has **pressed** and _ListItem_ has **highlighted**. ListViews
have a special state called __selected state__, which is used when a given
_ListView_ element is set to be the current one through the
**currentIndex**/**currentItem** properties. A ListView can have a selected
element also when disabled, in which case the **enabled** and **currentIndex**
properties will drive us to the __selected disabled state__.

These states draw the palette to have a color set for each state so a
different color can be applied on the component whenever a given state is
entered. These color sets are called value sets. A component can choose the
color using the following formula:

**theme.palette.valueSet.value**

where valueSet corresponds to one of the states enumerated above, with camel
case, and value is one of the palette color values listed in [Palette values](
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HBY0hRKtqNvOw8jfcDHvwbhagXYmOE6S-z2_ab7qtgk/edit#heading=h.3gvdp3c2jec8).

When coloring a component it is highly recommended to choose the value set
corresponding to a given state of the component, and never choose a different
color value from the value sets.

The wrong way:

    Rectangle {
        color: enabled ? theme.palette.normal.base : theme.palette.disabled.overlay
    }

The right way:

    Rectangle {
        color: enabled ? theme.palette.normal.base : theme.palette.disabled.base
    }

For example, coloring a custom Button could be done in the following way:

    Rectangle {
        signal clicked
        MouseArea {
            id: mouseArea
            anchors.fill: parent
            onClicked: parent.clicked()
        }
        color: enabled ? (mouseArea.pressed
                         ? theme.palette.highlighted.base
                         : theme.palette.normal.base)
                       : theme.palette.disabled.base
    }

Coloring the selected element of a ListView on the other hand is a lot
different:

    ListView {
        id: listView
        model: 10
        delegate: ListItem {
            // [...]
        }
        highlight: currentItem ? highlightComponent : null
        Component {
            id: highlightComponent
            Rectangle {
                color: listView.enabled ? (listView.activeFocus
                                          ? theme.palette.focused.background
                                          : theme.palette.selected.background)
                                        : theme.palette.selectedDisabled.background
            }
        }
    }

The following diagram illustrates the state transitions of a component driving
the colors.

![](/static/devportal_uploaded/a6c7cb9f-3d20-4a3d-8764-04b3ea063178-cms_page_media/1130/ssnCXsj5vjZkUKXe6ZBQ8ZA.png)

## Choosing the palette value set automatically

We are working on an API to chose the color value set based on the component’s
current state. This will be an extension of the StyledItem and ThemeSettings
component, and we hope it will reach the toolkit in OTA11. With the API
available, component styles will no longer need to use huge bindings to find
out the color set to be used, but instead will be able to use a simple binding
line. The API is in prototyping phase, thus this chapter will be updated
later.





