





# HTML5 Example: Online Accounts

Here we provide and discuss two example HTML5 apps that use the Ubuntu App
Platform JavaScript Online Accounts API:

  * **html-example-online-accounts** app: This app lets you browse all currently enabled Online Accounts and lets you drill down to see account details including authorization status and token. 
  * **html-example-online-accounts-facebook-albums** app: This app uses the Facebook authorization token derived from Online Accounts to browse your Facebook photo albums. 

The discussion here is focused primarily on Online Accounts API usage from
JavaScript. For help getting started writing Ubuntu HTML5 apps, check out
[https://developer.ubuntu.com/en/apps/platform/guides/online-accounts-developer-guide/](/en/phone/platform/guides/online-accounts-developer-guide/).

## Online Accounts overview

Ubuntu has a service and a corresponding system settings utility for Online
Accounts. The user may provide login credentials for various online accounts
such as Google, Facebook and others through Online Accounts settings. For such
user-enabled Online Accounts, the service logs in for the user and receives
authorization tokens from the external accounts. These tokens can be used to
enhance the user experience in Ubuntu and in your app. For example, after
enabling the Facebook account, searches in the Ubuntu Photos scope also return
photos your Facebook friends have posted. And, you can write an app that
obtains the Online Account authentication tokens from the Online Accounts API
and uses them.

## Online Accounts API key points

### Provider and Services

An Online Account is identified in the API by a Provider and a Service.

  * Provider: An object that represents a web service provider. For example, Facebook is a Provider. Google is another. 
  * Service: A Provider can offer one or more Services. For example, Facebook has several services: facebook-contacts, facebook-sharing, and facebook-microblog. 

The API call used to obtain the current accounts allows you to obtain a
filtered set of accounts by specifying the Provider or Service. (This is used
in the example Facebook Albums app discussed below.)

### Provider and Service files

In order to be able to use Online Account's API and access accounts data, it
is important to make sure that an application properly declares appropriate
policy group inthe application manifest and creates the necessary .provider
and .service files as described in the following reference text:
[https://developer.ubuntu.com/en/apps/platform/guides/online-accounts-developer-guide/](/en/phone/platform/guides/online-accounts-developer-guide/)

### Authorization data

When you have an object representing a particular account, you can use it to
check the account authorization status and obtain the authorization token.

## Getting the source trees

The app source trees for these two example apps are available as
subdirectories in the ubuntu-sdk-tutorials Bazaar branch on launchpad.net. Get
the branch as follows:

  1. Open a terminal with Ctrl + Alt + T. 
  2. Ensure the bzr package is installed with: 
    $ sudo apt-get install bzr

**Tip**: Tell bzr who you are with bzr whoami.

  3. Get the branch with: 
    $ bzr branch lp:ubuntu-sdk-tutorials

  4. Move into the branch’s html5/ directory:
    $ cd ubuntu-sdk-tutorials/html5

The two apps are subdirectories named for the app:

  * html5-example-online-accounts 
  * html5-example-online-accounts-facebook-albums 

## Run the apps

Run both apps to familiarize yourself with them:

  1. Ensure you have enabled some Online Accounts with **System Settings** > **Online Accounts**
  2. Move into the appropriate app subdirectory: 
    $ cd ubuntu-sdk-tutorials/html5-example-online-accounts

OR

    $ cd ubuntu-sdk-tutorials/html5-example-online-accounts-facebook-albums

  3. Launch the app, for example on the Desktop with ubuntu-html5-app-launcher --www=www

# App 1: Online Accounts browser

This app lets you browse and drill into currently available Online Accounts.

  * The app’s home page provides optional input fields to limit the displayed accounts by filtering by Provider and Service. 
  * There’s a **Show Accounts** button to list accounts. 
  * You can click an account to show the **Account Details** page, which includes the authorization status and token. 
  * When on **Account Details**, you can click to show the **Raw Details** page for the account, which is simply the account details displayed as JSON. 
  * The app uses the “deep” navigation pattern, which means the HTML5 consists of a Pagestack of Pages, so a toolbar with a **Back** button is available to remove the current Page from the top of the Pagestack and return to the previous Page. 

Now, let’s take a closer look at the relevant API calls.

## Getting the OnlineAccounts object

Naturally, you need to get the Online Accounts JavaScript object.

This is done in the window.onload event handler (or equivalent):

    window.onload = function () {
       var UI = new UbuntuUI();
       UI.init();
    [...]
       var api = external.getUnityObject('1.0');
       var oa = api.OnlineAccounts;

## Getting the list of providers for the current application

Through the .provider and .service files, an application defines the list of
Online Account providers and specific services from those providers that it
would require. Although this is a necessary step for the application to use
Online Account, this is not enough to get started using API to access account
information.

As an UbuntuTouch application, the user has to first grant the application the
right to access a given provider. If no account exists for a given provider,
the user should have the option to create one before being able to use it.

Those important elements are taken care of by one specific Online Account
HTML5 API function:

     
    var api = external.getUnityObject('1.0');
    var oa = api.OnlineAccounts;
    oa.api.requestAccount(string short_application_id, string provider_id, function callback)

The API function requestAccount does the work described above: allows to the
user to grant access to a given provider and (if it applies) to create a new
account for this provider.

For the definition of "short application id" and "provider_id" please refer to
[https://developer.ubuntu.com/en/apps/platform/guides/online-accounts-developer-guide/](/en/phone/platform/guides/online-accounts-developer-guide/)

## Getting and displaying a list of enabled accounts

This is done by providing a FILTERS object and a CALLBACK function to the
oa.api.getAccounts(FILTERS, CALLBACK) function.

  * The FILTERS object has two keys: ‘provider’ and ‘service’. When these keys have values, the returned accounts are limited to those that match. 
  * The CALLBACK runs and receives an object that is a list of the current accounts. 

Let’s take a closer look at the CALLBACK.

    oa.api.getAccounts(FILTERS, function(accounts) { [...] });

This defines an anonymous callback function that receives the list of
accounts, here as accounts.

**Tip**: The app then checks whether there are no accounts and, if so, alerts the user through the app home page.

## Populating the list of accounts

The app then populates an Ubuntu List with the accounts, where the displayed
text is extracted from the particular account, including its displayName,
Provider ID and Service ID, obtained with the API as follows:

    var info =
       act.displayName() + ' '
       + JSON.stringify((act.provider()['id'])) + ' '
       + JSON.stringify(act.service()['id']);

This List is populated with the Ubuntu List.append() method. This uses the
above info string and also takes the name of a callback function to be
executed when the user clicks the list item. So the app creates the mod object
(a few lines above) to store the values of the current account:

    var mod = {
       'name': act.displayName(),
       [...]
       'act': act
    }

The callback function is created and passed the mod object with:

    var dL = displayList(mod);

And the list is populated for each account with key account info and the
callback dL function.

## Account Details page

When the user clicks the account list item on the home page, the dL callback
displays the **Account Details** page. This page consists of four Ubuntu
lists:

  * The first displays a single item, the account’s displayName, obtained with ACCOUNT.displayname(). 
  * The second iterates through the Provider object keys and adds a list item with the key and its value. 
  * The third does the same, but for the Service object 
  * The fourth does the same for the the Authorization object, and here the authorization token and other data is obtained through another API call, discussed next. 

## Get authentication data for an account

To obtain current authentication data for an account, use the following.

ACCOUNT.authenticate(CALLBACK)

Where ACOUNT is one of the items in the array returned by
oa.api.getAccounts(...).

The callback function receives an object with the authorization data. In this
case, we name it results:

**Note**: in the following mod[‘act’] is the ACCOUNT object.
    mod['act'].authenticate(function (results) {
    // CODE TO HANDLE THE RESULTS
       }
    );

The results object is parsed and added to the fourth list on the **Account
Details** page.

# App2: Facebook Albums browser

As noted, this app lets you browse and drill into your Facebook photo albums,
displaying the photos for each.

  * The app home page has a **Get Albums** button that displays a list of your Facebook albums 
  * You can click an album list item to display an **Album** page that displays photos in the album using the Ubuntu Shapes widget 
  * You can click a photo shape on the **Album** page to display the **Photo** page that displays the photo in larger format 
  * The app uses the “deep” navigation pattern, which means the HTML5 consists of a Pagestack of Pages, so a toolbar with a **Back** button is available to remove the current Page from the top of the Pagestack and return to the previous Page. 

## Getting the OnlineAccounts object

This app also obtains the OnlineAccounts object in the same way as the
previous app:

    window.onload = function () {
    [...]
       var api = external.getUnityObject('1.0');
       var oa = api.OnlineAccounts;

## Getting the list of enabled accounts

Then, the list of accounts is obtained. However in this case a filter object
is provided that ensure only Facebook accounts are returned.

    var filters = {'provider': 'facebook', 'service': ''};
    oa.api.getAccounts(filters, function(accounts){
    [...]
    }

As you can see, the getAccounts method is passed an anonymous function as the
callback, and this receives the accounts array.

## Authenticating

Next, the first account in accounts has its authenticate method called and a
callback is provided. All Facebook accounts use the same authentication token,
so it is sufficient to use the first Facebook account without checking the
Service type.

    accounts[0].authenticate(authcallback);

The authcallback function receives the authentication data, here named res,
and the authentication token is obtained from it:

    function authcallback(res){
       token = res['data']['AccessToken'];
    [...]
    }

## Getting albums and photos from the Facebook Graph API

Now that we have covered the Ubuntu Online Accounts API usage, let’s only
touch the highest points on the rest of the code.

The app uses the token to get a list of the user’s Facebook albums through the
Facebook Graph API with this function:

    getFacebookAlbums(token, function(albums) {
    [...]
    }

getFacebookAlbums is passed an anonymous that receives the list of Facebook
albums as albums.

The albums are iterated through and the home page GUI is constructed. It
consists of an Ubuntu List, where the text is the album name and album id.
Each listitem has a click callback that on execution obtains the photos in the
album from Facebook and displays the Album page populated with photos as
Ubuntu Shape widgets, each of which has a click function to display the
**Photo** page with the right photo.

# Key points

  * Online Accounts keeps track of user enabled web accounts, including authorization status and tokens 
  * The Online Accounts JavaScript API lets your HTML5 app obtain this information 
  * You can get a list of Accounts identified by Provider and Service 
  * You can get authorization data for each account for the current user 
  * You can use the authorization data to interact with the external web site with their API and build rich apps that include personal content from protected external sources 





