





# Scope keywords

So you have written a scope? Great! Now how do you get your scope noticed?
Although “CoolScope” is a pretty awesome name, often simply giving something a
name is not good enough to describe what it is.

Let's say your scope is a “cooking lessons” scope. Wouldn’t it be awesome if
users could see results from your scope in the Food aggregator? What if your
scope included instructional videos on cooking, these could show up in the
Videos scope. What you want is for your scope to be easily identifiable and
discoverable, both to aggregators and to the user. To achieve this, your scope
needs to describe its content in some way. What you also want is a way of
telling what content an aggregator is interested in when it calls your scope
(e.g. returning video results when queried by the Videos scope).

Here is where scope keywords come in...

## What are scope keywords?

You could think of scope keywords like you would keywords for a website. On
the web, keywords are used by search engines to find relevant web pages. In
the context of scopes there are at least two “search engines” that are
interested in your content: users searching for scopes on the store, and
aggregators looking for child scopes. You need to add keywords to your scope
in order to improve its discoverability in these searches.

In the case of our “cooking lessons” example, we could add the keywords “food”
and “video”. This way, aggregators looking for scopes with “food” (e.g. the
Food scope) or “video” (e.g. the Videos scope) content can find our scope and
aggregate its results accordingly. We can also add some conditional logic to
our scope to return only the results relevant to the keyword(s) used by an
aggregator. Returning results about the latest cookbooks to the Videos scope
is not a great user experience (lets try not have our scope uninstalled by
unhappy users).

## How do I use keywords?

### Step 1: add keywords to your scope

Adding keywords to your scope is really easy. All you need to do is add a
“Keywords” key to the “[ScopeConfig]” group of your scope’s .ini file. The
value of the “Keywords” key must be a semicolon separated list of keywords
that identify your scope. For example: a scope with one keyword looks like
this:

    [ScopeConfig]
    DisplayName = human readable name of scope
    Description = description of scope
    Author = author
    Keywords = music

A scope with multiple keywords looks like this:

    [ScopeConfig]
    DisplayName = human readable name of scope
    Description = description of scope
    Author = author
    Keywords = music;video;news

### Step 2: return results according to the keywords requested

In order for your scope to return results relevant to the keyword(s) used by
an aggregator, you need a way of telling what keywords were used to discover
your scope. Your scope’s ScopeBase::search() method is called once for each
search query. This method receives two arguments: a CannedQuery object, and a
SearchMetadata object. SearchMetadata contains a bunch of additional
information about the search requests you receive, including the methods:

  * **is_aggregated()** - true if the request was initiated by an aggregator,
  * and **aggregated_keywords()** - the list of keywords used to discover your scope.

ScopeBase::search() is a factory method, so be sure to store the
SearchMetadata object into the instance of SearchQueryBase you return for
later use:

    class MyQuery : public SearchQueryBase { ... };
    SearchQueryBase::UPtr MyScope::search(CannedQuery const& query, SearchMetadata const& metadata)
    {
        SearchQueryBase::UPtr q(new MyQuery(query, metadata));
        return q;
    }

Now that you have instantiated a SearchQueryBase object containing the
request’s SearchMetadata, you can use the is_aggregated() and
aggregated_keywords() methods from within SearchQueryBase::run() to return the
appropriate results:

    void MyQuery::run(SearchReplyProxy const& reply)
    {
        if (metadata_.is_aggregated())
        {
            auto keywords = metadata_.aggregated_keywords();
            if (keywords.find("food") != keywords.end())
            {
                auto category = reply->register_category("food",
                                                         "CoolScope Food",
                                                         food_icon);
                do_food_search(reply, category);
            }
            else if (keywords.find("video") != keywords.end())
            {
                auto category = reply->register_category("video",
                                                         "CoolScope Videos",
                                                         videos_icon);
                do_video_search(reply, category);
            }
        }
        else
        {
            do_normal_search(reply);
        }
    }

You may notice in the code snippet above that for each keyword-related search
we receive, we register a specific results category. Although aggregators may
be willing to accept more than one category from its child scopes, they are
only required to accept the first.

Thereafter, an aggregator may choose to ignore any additional categories the
child scope registers. It is therefore recommended that scope authors follow
the above method of handling aggregated searches. It is also recommended that
your scope provide a decent category title (e.g. “CoolScope Food” / “CoolScope
Videos”). An aggregator is likely to display this category title as is within
its result set, so try to keep it clean and descriptive.

### Returning the right components

To fit in well, a child scope should take care return the result components
expected by aggregators for that keyword. Please see the [aggregator scopesintegration guide](https://developer.ubuntu.com/en/scopes/guides/integration-aggregator-scopes).

## What keywords should I use?

### Namespaced keywords

In some cases, a list of keywords is not specific enough. For example, if a
scope has "sports" and "news" keywords, does that mean it includes only sports
news? or does it mean it includes some news and some sports. Also, what
components should the returned results contain: those appropriate to sports or
to news?

Some scopes use **namespaced keywords** to clarify this. This allows scope
developers to pick the right keywords and to understand what is expected of
results under that keyword.

For example, the "news.sports" keyword clearly indicates its a news item about
sports. There could also be a "videos.sports" keyword that clearly indicates
that the scope returns sports videos.

For details about specific aggregator scopes, the keywords they listen for,
and their expectations for results, please see the [aggregator scopesintegration guide](https://developer.ubuntu.com/en/scopes/guides/integration-aggregator-scopes).

### General keywords

Below is a table of general keywords to use. Obviously this table doesn’t aim
to cover every type of scope imaginable, nor are scopes limited to using only
the keywords listed here, however it is best to try stick to these as much as
possible in order for your scope to be visible to aggregators.

Keyword

Description

Example scopes

Other example sources

apps

A resource for finding and installing applications

Ubuntu Store

-

art

The visual form of art such as drawing, painting, sculpture, etc.

Imgur, TimeOut

DeviantArt, OpenClipArt

audio

Any audio that isn't "music", such as podcasts or audio sample libraries

Jupiter Broadcasting

TWiT, podcasts

books

Either a digital or hard copy provider of books

Amazon, OpenLibrary

AbeBooks, The Book Depository

business

A directory for finding local or international businesses

Google Places, Kickstarter, Yahoo Finance, Yelp

Glassdoor, YellowPages

career

Any source that provides career opportunities or listings

Ars Technica, Kickstarter, Techfunder

SimplyHired, Linkedin

comics

Anything comic-related from online comics to comic-based films

Evert Kwok, Marvel Entertainment, XKCD

comiXology, DC Comics

data

Referring to any local or remote storage of data such as file-sharing, email,
etc.

GMail

Google Drive

design

Any visual design that doesn’t fall under “art”, such as architecture, logos,
etc.

Free CAD Videos

99designs

developer

Resources specific to software development

Jupiter Broadcasting, NoobsLab, Softpedia Linux

AskUbuntu, DevHelp

diy

General do-it-yourself guides that don’t fall under “developer” or
“educational”

-

Lifehacker, Instructables

drink

Any info about drinks, general or specific, alcoholic or nonalcoholic

8coupons, Google Places, TimeOut, Untappd

Mixology

educational

A provider of learning materials to furthering one’s education

Free CAD Videos, NoobsLab, OpenLibrary

Coursera

finance

Money related info such as banking, investments, stocks, etc.

Yahoo Finance

Bloomberg, Forbes

fitness

A resource that promotes, details, or assists in one’s physical fitness

My Activity, Runkeeper

Fitbit, Jawbone

food

Anything to do with food, be it preparation, consumption, or nutrition facts

8coupons, Google Places, Nutritionix, TimeOut

AllRecipes, theKitchn

gaming

Video game info, news, reviews, previews, trailers, cheats, etc.

Jupiter Broadcasting

IGN, Zynga

health

A resource that promotes healthy living that isn’t necessarily "fitness"
related

My Activity, Nutritionix, Runkeeper

WebMD, WeightWatchers

humor

Anything funny in any format, be it books, comics, audio, video, etc.

Evert Kwok, The Shovel, XKCD

9GAG

info

The type of factual information you’d find in an encyclopaedia

Stellar, Wikipedia

Britannica

interests

Any general and special interests that don’t quite fit into a common category

8coupons, OpenLibrary, Stellar, TimeOut, uBrick

Autoblog, CyclingWeekly, Pinterest

kids

Kid friendly resources such as toys, cartoons, media, games, etc.

uBrick

Yahoo! Kids, Nickelodeon

lifestyle

Info or advice on home and garden, outdoor living, fashion, beauty, etc.

InStyle

houzz, GoodHousekeeping

magazines

Either a digital or hard copy provider of magazines

OpenLibrary

Time, WIRED

movies

Referring to full length films, either on cinema or personal media formats

Cinema, Films, Hot New Trailers, TimeOut, YouTube

IMDB, TMDB, Netflix, Hulu

music

Anything music-related such as songs, artists, interviews, etc.

7digital, Grooveshark, SoundCloud, YouTube

LastFM, Spotify

nearby

Any service that utilises the user’s location in order to show nearby results

Google Places, Meetup, The Weather Channel, Yelp

Bandsintown, Yahoo Local

news

A provider of information about recent events or happenings

BBC News, euronews, Hacker News, Ubuntu News

Google News, CNN

personal

Referencing the user’s personal data such as files, messages, online profiles,
etc.

GMail, Kodi, My Music, My Videos, Tasks, Telegram

Calls, Contacts, Notes

photos

Referring to a resource of still photographs

Flickr, Imgur, Instagram, Kodi, Your Shot

Picasa

poi

A service that assists in discovering local or international points of
interest

Google Places, TimeOut

Garmin, TomTom

reference

The type of reference information you’d find in a dictionary or atlas

Dictionary, Stellar, Urban Dictionary, Wikipedia

Google Maps

science

Any resource on science and / or mathematics that doesn’t fall under “tech”.

Ars Technica, Stellar, XKCD

PopSci

shopping

A store (online or physical) from which users can buy merchandise

Amazon, eBay, Etsy

Orange

social

Any service that allows users to interact and share with each other

Flickr, Meetup, Reddit, Telegram, Twitter Trending

Facebook, Google+

sports

Any sports-related resources about any type of sport

BBC Sport, Formula One, La Liga, Premier League

ESPN, FOX Sports

tech

Any resource on technology that doesn't fall under “developer” or “science”

Ars Technica, CNET, engadget, Triple Tremelo

TechCrunch

traffic

A resource for providing details on local or international road traffic
conditions

Boston MBTA

INRIX

travel

Information on any form of travelling, whether by foot, car, train, aircraft,
etc.

8coupons, Boston MBTA, London Tube, TimeOut

TripAdvisor, trivago

trending

A resource for what is currently popular in fashion, media, news, etc.

InStyle, Twitter Trending

E!, TrendHunter

tv

Referring to TV in general not “movies”, such as TV series, live broadcasts,
etc.

EZTV, Hot New Trailers, PBS Video, TimeOut

Netflix, Hulu

video

Any video resource that doesn’t necessarily fall under “movies” or “tv”

Evert Kwok, Free CAD Videos, Kodi, Vimeo, YouTube

Dailymotion, Vevo

weather

A resource for providing details on local or international weather conditions

The Weather Channel

OpenWeatherMap

web

General web services such as search engines, crawlers, scrapers, etc.

Discerning Duck

Google, Bing





