





# Push notifications client guide

This document describes how to use the Ubuntu Push Client service from the
point of view of a developer writing a QML-based application.

Let's describe the push system by way of an example.

Alice has written a chat application called Chatter. Using it, Bob can send
messages to Carol and viceversa. Alice has a web application for it, so the
way it works now is that Bob connects to the service, posts a message, and
when Carol connects, she gets it. If Carol leaves the browser window open, it
beeps when messages arrive.

Now Alice wants to create an Ubuntu Touch app for Chatter, so she implements
the same architecture using a client that does the same thing as the web
browser. Sadly, since applications on Ubuntu Touch don't run continuously,
messages are only delivered when Carol opens the app, and the user experience
suffers.

Using the Ubuntu Push Server, this problem is alleviated: the Chatter server
will deliver the messages to the Ubuntu Push Server, which in turn will send
it in an efficient manner to the Ubuntu Push Client running in Bob and Carol's
devices. The user sees a notification (all without starting the app) and then
can launch it if he's interested in reading messages at that point.

Since the app is not started and messages are delivered oportunistically, this
is both battery and bandwidth-efficient.

The Ubuntu Push system provides:

  * A push server which receives **push messages** from the app servers, queues them and delivers them efficiently to the devices.
  * A push client which receives those messages, queues messages to the app and displays notifications to the user





The full lifecycle of a push message is:

  1. Created in a application-specific server
  2. Sent to the Ubuntu Push server, targeted at a user or user+device pair
  3. Delivered to one or more Ubuntu devices
  4. Passed through the application helper for processing
  5. Notification displayed to the user (via different mechanisms)
  6. Application Message queued for the app's use

If the user interacts with the notification, the application is launched and
should check its queue for messages it has to process.

![](/static/devportal_uploaded/6d4838df-e8f8-4141-a528-988dddc9a362-cms_page_media/70/push.png)





For the app developer, there are several components needed:

  * A server that sends the **push messages** to the Ubuntu Push server
  * Support in the client app for registering with the Ubuntu Push client
  * Support in the client app to react to **notifications** displayed to the user and process **application messages**
  * A helper program with application-specific knowledge that transforms **push messages** as needed.

In the following sections, we'll see how to implement all the client side
parts. For the application server, see the Ubuntu Push Server API section





## The PushClient component

Example:

    import Ubuntu.PushNotifications 0.1
    PushClient {
        id: pushClient
        Component.onCompleted: {
            notificationsChanged.connect(messageList.handle_notifications)
            error.connect(messageList.handle_error)
        }
        appId: "com.ubuntu.developer.push.hello_hello"
    }

### Registration: the appId and token properties

To register with the push system and start receiving notifications, set the
appId property to your application's APP_ID, with or without version number.
For this to succeed the user **must** have an Ubuntu One account configured in
the device.

The APP_ID is as described in the [ApplicationIddocumentation](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/AppStore/Interfaces/ApplicationId)
except that the version is treated as optional. Therefore both
com.ubuntu.music_music and com.ubuntu.music_music_1.3.496 are valid. Keep in
mind that while both versioned and unversioned APP_IDs are valid, they are
still different and will affect which notifications are delivered to the
application. Unversioned IDs mean the token will be the same after updates and
the application will receive old notifications, while versioned IDs mean the
app needs to explicitly ask to get older messages delivered.

Setting the same appId more than once has no effect.

After you are registered, if no error occurs, the PushClient will have a value
set in its token property which uniquely identifies the user+device
combination.

### Receiving notifications

When a notification is received by the Push Client, it will be delivered to
your application's push helper, and then placed in your application's mailbox.
At that point, the PushClient will emit the notificationsChanged(QStringList)
signal containing your messages. You should probably connect to that signal
and handle those messages.

Because of the application's lifecycle, there is no guarantee that it will be
running when the signal is emitted. For that reason, apps should check for
pending notifications whenever they are activated or started. To do that, use
the getNotifications() slot. Triggering that slot will fetch notifications and
trigger the notificationsChanged(QStringList) signal.

### Error handling

Whenever PushClient suffers an error, it will emit the error(QString) signal
with the error message.

### Persistent notification management

Some notifications are persistent, meaning that, after they are presented,
they don't disappear automatically. This API allows the app to manage that
type of notifications.

On each notification there's an optional tag field, used for this purpose.

The persistent property of PushClient contains the list of the tags of
notifications with the "persist" element set to true that are visible to the
user right now.

The void clearPersistent(QStringList tags) method clears persistent
notifications for that app marked by tags. If no tag is given, match all.

The count property sets the counter in the application's icon to the given
value.





## Application helpers

The payload delivered to push-client will be passed onto a helper program that
can modify it as needed before passing it onto the postal service (see the
helper output format).

The helper receives two arguments infile and outfile. The message is delivered
via infile and the transformed version is placed in outfile.

This is the simplest possible useful helper, which simply passes the message
through unchanged:

    #!/usr/bin/python3
    import sys
    f1, f2 = sys.argv[1:3]
    open(f2, "w").write(open(f1).read())

Helpers need to be added to the click package manifest:

    {
        "name": "com.ubuntu.developer.ralsina.hello",
        "description": "description of hello",
        "framework": "ubuntu-sdk-14.10-qml-dev2",
        "architecture": "all",
        "title": "hello",
        "hooks": {
            "hello": {
                "apparmor": "hello.json",
                "desktop": "hello.desktop"
            },
            "helloHelper": {
                "apparmor": "helloHelper-apparmor.json",
                "push-helper": "helloHelper.json"
            }
        },
        "version": "0.2",
        "maintainer": "Roberto Alsina <roberto.alsina@canonical.com>"
    }

Here, we created a helloHelper entry in hooks that has an apparmor profile and
an additional JSON file for the push-helper hook.

helloHelper-apparmor.json must contain **only** the push-notification-client
policy group:

    {
        "policy_groups": [
            "push-notification-client"
        ],
        "policy_version": 1.2
    }

And helloHelper.json must have at least a exec key with the path to the helper
executable relative to the json, and optionally an app_id key containing the
short id of one of the apps in the package (in the format packagename_appname
without a version). If the app_id is not specified, the helper will be used
for all apps in the package:

    {
        "exec": "helloHelper",
        "app_id": "com.ubuntu.developer.ralsina.hello_hello"
    }

Note

For deb packages, helpers should be installed into /usr/lib/ubuntu-push-
client/legacy-helpers/ as part of the package.





## Helper output format

Helpers output has two parts, the postal message (in the "message" key) and a
notification to be presented to the user (in the "notification" key).

Here's a simple example:

    {
        "message": "foobar",
        "notification": {
            "tag": "foo",
            "card": {
                "summary": "yes",
                "body": "hello",
                "popup": true,
                "persist": true,
                "timestamp": 1407160197
            }
            "sound": "buzz.mp3",
            "vibrate": {
                "pattern": [200, 100],
                "repeat": 2
            }
            "emblem-counter": {
                "count": 12,
                "visible": true
            }
        }
    }

The notification can contain a **tag** field, which can later be used by the
persistent notification management API.

Note

This format **will** change with future versions of the SDK and it **may** be
incompatible.

message:

(optional) A JSON object that is passed as-is to the application via PopAll.

notification:

(optional) Describes the user-facing notifications triggered by this push
message.

The notification can contain a **card**. A card describes a specific
notification to be given to the user, and has the following fields:

summary:

(required) a title. The card will not be presented if this is missing.

body:

longer text, defaults to empty.

actions:

If empty (the default), a bubble notification is non-clickable. If you add a
URL, then bubble notifications are clickable and launch that URL. One use for
this is using a URL like
appid://com.ubuntu.developer.ralsina.hello/hello/current-user-version which
will switch to the app or launch it if it's not running. See the [URLDispatcher guide](https://developer.ubuntu.com/en/apps/platform/guides/url-dispatcher-guide/) for more information.

icon:

An icon relating to the event being notified. Defaults to empty (no icon); a
secondary icon relating to the application will be shown as well, regardless
of this field.

timestamp:

Seconds since the unix epoch, only used for persist (for now). If zero or
unset, defaults to current timestamp.

persist:

Whether to show in notification centre; defaults to false

popup:

Whether to show in a bubble. Users can disable this, and can easily miss them,
so don't rely on it exclusively. Defaults to false.

The notification can contain a **sound** field. This is either a boolean (play
a predetermined sound) or the path to a sound file. The user can disable it,
so don't rely on it exclusively. Defaults to empty (no sound). The path is
relative, and will be looked up in (a) the application's
.local/share/<pkgname>, and (b) standard xdg dirs.

The notification can contain a **vibrate** field, causing haptic feedback,
which can be either a boolean (if true, vibrate a predetermined way) or an
object that has the following content:

Note

Keep in mind that the precise way in which each field is presented to the user
depends on factors such as whether it's shown as a bubble or in the
notification centre, or even the version of Ubuntu Touch the user has on their
device.

pattern:

a list of integers describing a vibration pattern (duration of alternating
vibration/no vibration times, in milliseconds).

repeat:

number of times the pattern has to be repeated (defaults to 1, 0 is the same
as 1).

The notification can contain a **emblem-counter** field, with the following
content:

count:

a number to be displayed over the application's icon in the launcher.

visible:

set to true to show the counter, or false to hide it.

Note

Unlike other notifications, emblem-counter needs to be cleaned by the app
itself. Please see the persistent notification management section.

## Security

To use the push API, applications need to request permission in their security
profile, using something like this:

    {
        "policy_groups": [
            "networking",
            "push-notification-client"
        ],
        "policy_version": 1.2
    }





## Ubuntu Push Server API

The Ubuntu Push server is located at
[https://push.ubuntu.com](https://push.ubuntu.com) and has a single endpoint:
/notify. To notify a user, your application has to do a POST with Content-
type: application/json.

Here is an example of the POST body using all the fields:

    {
        "appid": "com.ubuntu.music_music",
        "expire_on": "2014-10-08T14:48:00.000Z",
        "token": "LeA4tRQG9hhEkuhngdouoA==",
        "clear_pending": true,
        "replace_tag": "tagname",
        "data": {
            "id": 43578,
            "timestamp": 1409583746,
            "serial": 1254,
            "sender": "Joe",
            "snippet": "Hi there!"
        }
    }

Note

The contents of the data field are arbitrary. They should be enough for your
helper to build a notification using it, and decide whether it should be
displayed or not. Keep in mind that this will be processed by more than one
version of the helper, because the user may be using an older version of your
app.

appid:

ID of the application that will receive the notification, as described in the
client side documentation.

expire_on:

Expiration date/time for this message, in [ISO8601 Extendendformat](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601)

token:

The token identifying the user+device to which the message is directed, as
described in the client side documentation.

clear_pending:

Discards all previous pending notifications. Usually in response to getting a
"too-many-pending" error.

replace_tag:

If there's a pending notification with the same tag, delete it before queuing
this new one.

data:

A JSON object.





