





# Introduction

This document describes how to use the Ubuntu Push Client service from a
platform integrator's point of view. Application developers are expected to
use a much simpler API, in turn based on the lower-level API described here.

The expected audience for this document is, therefore, either platform
developers, or application developers who, for whatever reason, can't use or
prefer not to use the available higher level APIs.

* * *

Let's describe the push system by way of an example.

Alice has written a chat application called Chatter. Using it, Bob can send
messages to Carol and viceversa. Alice has a web application for it, so the
way it works now is that Bob connects to the service, posts a message, and
when Carol connects, she gets it. If Carol leaves the browser window open, it
beeps when messages arrive.

Now Alice wants to create an Ubuntu app for Chatter, so she implements the
same architecture using a client that does the same thing as the web browser.
Sadly, since applications on Ubuntu for devices don't run continuously,
messages are only delivered when Carol opens the app, and the user experience
suffers.

Using the Ubuntu Push Server, this problem is alleviated: the Chatter server
will deliver the messages to the Ubuntu Push Server, which in turn will send
it in an efficient manner to the Ubuntu Push Client running in Bob and Carol's
devices. The user sees a notification (all without starting the app) and then
can launch it if he's interested in reading messages at that point.

Since the app is not started and messages are delivered oportunistically, this
is both battery and bandwidth-efficient.

![Push Notifications diagram](/static/devportal_uploaded/b3ddee0c-77cb-4a29-9ea8-a09d0374ae34-cms_page_media/64/push2.png)

The Ubuntu Push system provides:

  * A push server which receives **push messages** from the app servers, queues them and delivers them efficiently to the devices.
  * A push client which receives those messages, queues messages to the app and displays notifications to the user

The full lifecycle of a push message is:

  * Created in a application-specific server
  * Sent to the Ubuntu Push server, targeted at a user or user+device pair
  * Delivered to one or more Ubuntu devices
  * Passed through the application helper for processing
  * Notification displayed to the user (via different mechanisms)
  * Application Message queued for the app's use

If the user interacts with the notification, the application is launched and
should check its queue for messages it has to process.

For the app developer, there are several components needed:

  * A server that sends the **push messages** to the Ubuntu Push server
  * Support in the client app for registering with the Ubuntu Push client
  * Support in the client app to react to **notifications** displayed to the user and process **application messages**
  * A helper program with application-specific knowledge that transforms **push messages** as needed.

In the following sections, we'll see how to implement all the client side
parts. For the application server, see the Ubuntu Push Server API section

# The PushNotifications Service

Service:

com.ubuntu.PushNotifications

Object path:

/com/ubuntu/PushNotifications/QUOTED_PKGNAME

The PushNotifications service handles registering the device with the Ubuntu
Push service to enable delivery of messages to it.

Each Ubuntu package has to use a separate object path for security reasons,
that's why the object path includes QUOTED_PKGNAME. For example, in the case
of the music application, the package name is com.ubuntu.music and
QUOTED_PKGNAME is com_2eubuntu_2emusic. Everything that is not a letter or
digit has to be quoted as _XX where XX are the hex digits of the character. In
practice, this means replacing "." with "_2e" and "-" with "_2f"

Note

For applications that are not installed as part of click packages, the
QUOTED_PKGNAME is "_" and the APP_ID when required is _PACKAGENAME.

For example, for ubuntu-system-settins:

  * QUOTED_PKGNAME is _
  * APP_ID is _ubuntu-system-settings

## com.ubuntu.PushNotifications.Register

string Register(string APP_ID)

Example:

    $ gdbus call --session --dest com.ubuntu.PushNotifications --object-path /com/ubuntu/PushNotifications/com_2eubuntu_2emusic \
    --method com.ubuntu.PushNotifications.Register com.ubuntu.music_music
    ('LeA4tRQG9hhEkuhngdouoA==',)

The Register method takes as argument the APP_ID (in the example,
com.ubuntu.music_music) and returns a token identifying the user and device.
For this to succeed the user **must** have an Ubuntu One account configured in
the device.

The APP_ID is as described in the [ApplicationIddocumentation](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/AppStore/Interfaces/ApplicationId)
except that the version is treated as optional. Therefore both
com.ubuntu.music_music and com.ubuntu.music_music_1.3.496 are valid. Keep in
mind that while both versioned and unversioned APP_IDs are valid, they are
still different and will affect which notifications are delivered to the
application. Unversioned IDs mean the token will be the same after updates and
the application will receive old notifications, while versioned IDs mean the
app needs to explicitly ask to get older messages delivered.

Register is idempotent, and calling it multiple times returns the same token.

This token is later used by the application server to indicate the recipient
of notifications.

Note

There is currently no way to send a push message to all of a user's devices.
The application server has to send to each registered device individually
instead.

## com.ubuntu.PushNotifications.Unregister

void Unregister(string APP_ID)

Example:

    $ gdbus call --session --dest com.ubuntu.PushNotifications --object-path /com/ubuntu/PushNotifications/com_2eubuntu_2emusic \
    --method com.ubuntu.PushNotifications.Unregister com.ubuntu.music_music

The Unregister method invalidates the token obtained via Register therefore
disabling reception of push messages.

The method takes as argument the APP_ID (in the example,
com.ubuntu.music_music) and returns nothing.

The APP_ID is as described in the [ApplicationIddocumentation](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/AppStore/Interfaces/ApplicationId)
except that the version is treated as optional. Therefore both
com.ubuntu.music_music and com.ubuntu.music_music_1.3.496 are valid.

# The Postal Service

Service:

com.ubuntu.Postal

Object path:

/com/ubuntu/Postal/QUOTED_PKGNAME

The Postal service delivers the actual messages to the applications. After the
application is registered, the push client will begin delivering messages to
the device, which will then (possibly) cause specific notifications to be
presented to the user (message bubbles, sounds, haptic feedbak, etc.)
Regardless of whether the user acknowledges those notifications or not, the
payload of the push message is put in the Postal service for the application
to pick up.

Because user response to notifications can cause application activation, apps
should check the status of the Postal service every time the application
activates.

## com.ubuntu.Postal.Post

void Post(string APP_ID, string message)

Example:

    gdbus call --session --dest com.ubuntu.Postal --object-path /com/ubuntu/Postal/com_2eubuntu_2emusic \
    --method com.ubuntu.Postal.Post com.ubuntu.music_music \
    '"{\"message\": \"foobar\", \"notification\":{\"card\": {\"summary\": \"yes\", \"body\": \"hello\", \"popup\": true, \"persist\": true}}}"'

The arguments for the Post method are APP_ID (in the example,
com.ubuntu.music_music) and a JSON string describing a push message.

Depending on the contents of the push message it may trigger user-facing
notifications, and will queue a message for the app to get via the PopAll
method.

The APP_ID is as described in the [ApplicationIddocumentation](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/AppStore/Interfaces/ApplicationId)
except that the version is treated as optional. Therefore both
com.ubuntu.music_music and com.ubuntu.music_music_1.3.496 are valid.

Note

Post is useful as a unified frontend for notifications in Ubuntu, since it
wraps and abstracts several different APIs.

## com.ubuntu.Postal.PopAll

array{string} PopAll(string APP_ID)

Example:

    $ gdbus call --session --dest com.ubuntu.Postal --object-path /com/ubuntu/Postal/com_2eubuntu_2emusic \
    --method com.ubuntu.Postal.PopAll com.ubuntu.music_music
    (['{"foo": "bar", ....}'],)

The argument for the PopAll method is the APP_ID and it returns a list of
strings, each string being a separate postal message, the "message" element of
a helper's output fed from Post or from the Ubuntu Push service,

## Post Signal

void Post(string APP_ID)

Every time a notification is posted, the postal service will emit the Post
signal. Your app can connect to it to react to incoming notifications if it's
running when they arrive. Remember that on Ubuntu, the application lifecycle
means it will often **not** be running when notifications arrive. If the
application is in the foreground when a notification arrives, the notification
**will not** be presented.

The object path is similar to that of the Postal service methods, containing
the QUOTED_PKGNAME.

## Persistent Notification Management

Some notifications are persistent, meaning they don't disappear automatically.
For those notifications, there is an API that allows the app to manage them
without having to know the underlying details of the platform.

On each notification there's an optional tag field, used for this purpose.

array(string) ListPersistent(string APP_ID)

Returns a list of the tags of notifications with the "persist" element set to
true that are visible to the user right now.

void ClearPersistent(string APP_ID, [tag1, tag2,....])

Clears persistent notifications for that app by tag(s). If none given, match
all.

void SetCounter(string APP_ID, int count int, bool visible)

Set the counter to the given values.

# Application Helpers

The payload delivered to push-client will be passed onto a helper program that
can modify it as needed before passing it onto the postal service (see Helper
Output Format).

The helper receives two arguments infile and outfile. The message is delivered
via infile and the transformed version is placed in outfile.

This is the simplest possible useful helper, which simply passes the message
through unchanged:

    #!/usr/bin/python3
    import sys
    f1, f2 = sys.argv[1:3]
    open(f2, "w").write(open(f1).read())

Helpers need to be added to the click package manifest:

    {
            "name": "com.ubuntu.developer.ralsina.hello",
            "description": "description of hello",
            "framework": "ubuntu-sdk-14.10-qml-dev2",
            "architecture": "all",
            "title": "hello",
            "hooks": {
                    "hello": {
                            "apparmor": "hello.json",
                            "desktop": "hello.desktop"
                    },
                    "helloHelper": {
                            "apparmor": "helloHelper-apparmor.json",
                            "push-helper": "helloHelper.json"
                    }
            },
            "version": "0.2",
            "maintainer": "Roberto Alsina <roberto.alsina@canonical.com>"
    }

Here, we created a helloHelper entry in hooks that has an apparmor profile and
an additional JSON file for the push-helper hook.

helloHelper-apparmor.json must contain **only** the push-notification-client
policy group:

    {
            "policy_groups": [
                    "push-notification-client"
            ],
            "policy_version": 1.2
    }

And helloHelper.json must have at least a exec key with the path to the helper
executable relative to the json, and optionally an app_id key containing the
short id of one of the apps in the package (in the format packagename_appname
without a version). If the app_id is not specified, the helper will be used
for all apps in the package:

    {
            "exec": "helloHelper",
            "app_id": "com.ubuntu.developer.ralsina.hello_hello"
    }

Note

For deb packages, helpers should be installed into /usr/lib/ubuntu-push-
client/legacy-helpers/ as part of the package.

# Helper Output Format

Helpers output has two parts, the postal message (in the "message" key) and a
notification to be presented to the user (in the "notification" key).

Here's a simple example:

    {
            "message": "foobar",
            "notification": {
                    "tag": "foo",
                    "card": {
                            "summary": "yes",
                            "body": "hello",
                            "popup": true,
                            "persist": true
                    }
                    "sound": "buzz.mp3",
                    "vibrate": {
                            "pattern": [200, 100],
                            "duration": 200,
                            "repeat": 2
                    }
                    "emblem-counter": {
                            "count": 12,
                            "visible": true
                    }
            }
    }

The notification can contain a **tag** field, which can later be used by the
persistent notification management API.

message:

(optional) A JSON object that is passed as-is to the application via PopAll.

notification:

(optional) Describes the user-facing notifications triggered by this push
message.

The notification can contain a **card**. A card describes a specific
notification to be given to the user, and has the following fields:

summary:

(required) a title. The card will not be presented if this is missing.

body:

longer text, defaults to empty.

actions:

If empty (the default), a bubble notification is non-clickable. If you add a
URL, then bubble notifications are clickable and launch that URL. One use for
this is using a URL like
appid://com.ubuntu.developer.ralsina.hello/hello/current-user-version which
will switch to the app or launch it if it's not running. See
[URLDispatcher](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/URLDispatcher) for more information.

icon:

An icon relating to the event being notified. Defaults to empty (no icon); a
secondary icon relating to the application will be shown as well, regardless
of this field.

timestamp:

Seconds since the unix epoch, only used for persist (for now)

persist:

Whether to show in notification centre; defaults to false

popup:

Whether to show in a bubble. Users can disable this, and can easily miss them,
so don't rely on it exclusively. Defaults to false.

Note

Keep in mind that the precise way in which each field is presented to the user
depends on factors such as whether it's shown as a bubble or in the
notification centre, or even the version of Ubuntu the user has on their
device.

The notification can contain a **sound** field. This is the path to a sound
file. The user can disable it, so don't rely on it exclusively. Defaults to
empty (no sound). This is a relative path, and will be looked up in (a) the
application's .local/share/<pkgname>, and (b) standard xdg dirs.

The notification can contain a **vibrate** field, causing haptic feedback,
that has the following content:

pattern:

a list of integers describing a vibration pattern.

duration:

duration in milliseconds. Is equivalent to setting pattern to [duration], and
overrides pattern.

repeat:

number of times the pattern has to be repeated (defaults to 1, 0 is the same
as 1).

The notification can contain a **emblem-counter** field, with the following
content:

count:

a number to be displayed over the application's icon in the launcher.

visible:

set to true to show the counter, or false to hide it.

Note

Unlike other notifications, emblem-counter needs to be cleaned by the app
itself. Please see the persistent notification management section.

## Security

To use the push API, applications need to request permission in their security
profile, using something like this:

    {
            "policy_groups": [
                    "networking",
                    "push-notification-client"
            ],
            "policy_version": 1.2
    }

# Ubuntu Push Server API

The Ubuntu Push server is located at
[https://push.ubuntu.com](https://push.ubuntu.com/) and has a single endpoint:
/notify. To notify a user, your application has to do a POST with Content-
type: application/json.

Here is an example of the POST body using all the fields:

    {
            "appid": "com.ubuntu.music_music",
            "expire_on": "2014-10-08T14:48:00.000Z",
            "token": "LeA4tRQG9hhEkuhngdouoA==",
            "clear_pending": true,
            "replace_tag": "tagname",
            "data": {
                    "message": "foobar",
                    "notification": {
                            "card": {
                                    "summary": "yes",
                                    "body": "hello",
                                    "popup": true,
                                    "persist": true
                            }
                            "sound": "buzz.mp3",
                            "tag": "foo",
                            "vibrate": {
                                    "duration": 200,
                                    "pattern": [200, 100],
                                    "repeat": 2
                            }
                            "emblem-counter": {
                                    "count": 12,
                                    "visible": true
                            }
                    }
            }
    }

appid:

ID of the application that will receive the notification, as described in the
client side documentation.

expire_on:

Expiration date/time for this message, in [ISO8601 Extendendformat](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601)

token:

The token identifying the user+device to which the message is directed, as
described in the client side documentation.

clear_pending:

Discards all previous pending notifications. Usually in response to getting a
"too-many-pending" error.

replace_tag:

If there's a pending notification with the same tag, delete it before queuing
this new one.

data:

A JSON object.

In this example, data is what a helper would output but that's not necessarily
the case. The content of the data field will be passed to the helper
application which **has** to produce output in that format.





