





In this tutorial you will learn how to write an autopilot test to strengthen
the quality of your Ubuntu QML application. It builds upon the Currency
Converter Tutorial.

## Requirements

  * Ubuntu 14.04 or later -- [get Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/download/desktop/).
  * The Currency Converter tutorial -- if you haven't already, [complete the Currency Converter tutorial](/en/phone/apps/qml/tutorials/building-your-first-qml-app/).
  * The lower level testing tutorials on [unit testing](/en/phone/apps/qml/tutorials/qml-unit-testing/), and [integration testing](/en/phone/apps/qml/tutorials/qml-integration-testing/).

## Testing like a user with autopilot

Whew! Presuming we've written our QML application, and written some unit tests
for it, we can now be assured our program works properly, and if we break it
we'll know about it, right?

Well, from a logical level yes, we've now assured ourselves the program should
behave reasonably. That is until a user gets ahold of it.

How can we make sure when they press a button or interact with our application
that it will respond properly? What can we do to fill this final gap? The
answer is a functional testing tool called Autopilot.

## Preparing for launch

First things first, we'll need to make sure we install the autopilot tool.
This can be done using the autopilot PPA. Add the PPA and install the
packages.

    sudo apt-add-repository ppa:autopilot/1.5 && sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install python3-autopilot python3-autopilot-vis

Let's also grab a branch of currency converter code from the tutorial with
autopilot tests already written and in place to look at.

    bzr branch lp:ubuntu-sdk-tutorials

This creates a new folder called ubuntu-sdk-tutorials. The code we'll be
looking at inside the branch is under getting-started/CurrencyConverter.

    cd ubuntu-sdk-tutorials/getting-started/CurrencyConverter

## Learning the basics of autopilot

A basic autopilot test consists of:

  * a **setup** phase where we **start the application and create any data** we might need. Next,
  * we **interact with the application** by pressing buttons, sending keystrokes and doing things a user would do. Finally,
  * we **make some assertions** about our actions to ensure the application responded appropriately.

If you've used other testing frameworks that follow in the line of xUnit, you
will notice the similarities.

So what does a test look like? If you notice there is already an autopilot
folder waiting for us inside the _tests_ subfolder of the "CurrencyConverter"
subdirectory. Inside is a folder aptly called _currencyconverter_ which
represents our testsuite name. Finally, inside this folder is the testcases
and supporting code.

![](/static/devportal_uploaded/e9e829ae-b5a1-4ce1-a340-8f7a9b00f3ef-cms_page_media/128/Selection_009.jpg)

    cd tests/functional/currencyconverter

So, let's take a look and talk about how it works.

Looking at the __init__.py file:

    from autopilot.testcase import AutopilotTestCase
    ...
    class CurrencyConverterTestCase(AutopilotTestCase):
    ...
        def setUp(self):
            super(CurrencyConverterTestCase, self).setUp()
            self.launcher, self.test_type = self.get_launcher_and_type()
            self.app = currencyconverter.CurrencyConverter(self.launcher(),
                                                           self.test_type)

And then the test_currencyconverter.py file:

    from currencyconverter.tests import CurrencyConverterTestCase
    class TestMainWindow(CurrencyConverterTestCase):
        def test_from_currency_convert(self):
            """ Setting from currency value should update to currency """
            self.app.main_view.set_random_from_value()
            to_value = self.app.main_view.get_to_currency_field().get_value()
            self.assertGreater(to_value, 0)
        def test_to_currency_convert(self):
            """ Setting to currency value should update from currency """
            self.app.main_view.set_random_to_value()
            from_value = self.app.main_view.get_from_currency_field().get_value()
            self.assertGreater(from_value, 0)
        def test_clear_button(self):
            """ Test if the clear button clears the screen """
            self.app.main_view.set_random_from_value()
            self.app.main_view.use_clear_button()
            self.assertEquals(self.app.main_view.get_from_currency_field().text,
                              '0.0')
            self.assertEquals(self.app.main_view.get_to_currency_field().text,
                              '0.0')

Back to __init__.py:

    class CurrencyConverter(object):
        """Autopilot helper object for the currencyconverter application."""
        def __init__(self, app_proxy, test_type):
            self.app = app_proxy
            self.test_type = test_type
            self.main_view = self.app.select_single(Main)
        @property
        def pointing_device(self):
            return self.app.pointing_device
    class Main(ubuntuuitoolkit.MainView):
        """Autopilot helper for the MainView."""
        def __init__(self, *args):
            super(Main, self).__init__(*args)
            self.visible.wait_for(True)
            self.wait_for_network()

We implement an AutopilotTestCase object (the CurrencyConverterTestCase class)
and define a new method for each test (e.g. test_clear_button).

You will also notice the setUp method inside __init__.py. This is called
before each test is run by the testrunner. In this case, our setup only
consists of launching the application before we run each test and waiting for
it to appear before continuing.

After setUp is launched a test_* function is executed. Finally the tearDown is
run and the cycle continues with the next testcase.

Since we're testing our UI on multiple form factors, you'll notice we include
logic for a mouse or touch device in __init__.py. Autopilot supports running
against an agnostic display server (Xorg, mir, etc). We simply initialize our
"pointing_device", and we can issue touch/click and movement commands
generically. In this way **our testcase can be the same across multiple form
factors**.

## The computer has eyes

To make things easier for us, we've also defined a class called Main inside of
__init__.py with several helper functions which you see utilized in the tests
inside of test_currencyconverter.py. In fact, this class builds upon an
[entire suite of helpers](http://people.canonical.com/~nskaggs/autopilot-sdk-helpers.html) made just for autopilot testing of Ubuntu SDK applications.

These helper functions are the basis of the _vision_ we have inside the
application. This is because autopilot hooks into the dbus session of our
application to read the data behind the scenes. In this way we can then make
assertions about an object's properties.

If you look closely you'll notice something else about the QML source file for
currency converter. To aid autopilot's vision, we've added **objectName's** to
the objects we wish to inspect at runtime. Using this objectName, we can issue
a _select_single_ or _select_multiple_ call to autopilot to grab this specific
object easily. Once we have the object, we can examine an object's data
structures to confirm application behavior at runtime by using asserts.

    Button {
        id: clearBtn
        objectName: "clearBtn"
        text: i18n.tr("Clear")
        width: units.gu(12)
        onClicked: {
            inputTo.text = '0.0';
            inputFrom.text = '0.0';
        }
    }

## Testing the clear button

So, let's examine the testcase written to test the clear button for the
application to see how this works.

  1. First we utilize our helper method to set a random value in the from field. This is done using the _select_single_ method autopilot exposes to us. Given a named property type and object name, we can retrieve the object during runtime and examine it.
  2. Next we utilize a second helper method, which relies on the autopilot functions to tap or click on the clearButton. You can see all of these helper methods inside the Main class in __init__.py.
  3. Lastly, we need to assert the resulting text fields are zeroed out -- just like we coded it.
    from currencyconverter.tests import CurrencyConverterTestCase
    class TestMainWindow(CurrencyConverterTestCase):
        def test_clear_button(self):
            """ Test if the clear button clears the screen """
            self.app.main_view.set_random_from_value()
            self.app.main_view.use_clear_button()
            self.assertEquals(self.app.main_view.get_from_currency_field().text,
                              '0.0')
            self.assertEquals(self.app.main_view.get_to_currency_field().text,
                              '0.0')

## Computer, run my test!

We're now ready to execute the test to see what happens. Autopilot supports
listing the testcases present in a testsuite and executing them via the
autopilot list [testsuite] and autopilot3 run [testsuite] commands
respectively. Autopilot also supports running in verbose mode via the '-v'
argument. This helps us see the output as we execute the test. So from the
tests/autopilot subfolder, execute:

    autopilot3 run -v currencyconverter

This will execute the entire Testsuite. It's important you execute this
command from the tests/autopilot subfolder, else python will fail to find your
testsuite. We can also run a single test at a time by specifying the testname
in our run command. We can use the list command to see what's available, and
then run just one test.

    autopilot list currencyconverter
    autopilot3 run -v currencyconverter.tests.test_currencyconverter.TestCurrencyConverter.test_clear_button

## Seeing what autopilot sees

Autopilot contains an additional tool that let's us _see_ the entire dbus
session that autopilot has available; including things we might not realize
are defined by our application. This can be useful for adding more advanced
testcases or to debug your existing tests further. This happens via the
autopilot launch and autopilot vis commands. The launch command prepares and
launches the application with a hook for autopilot to introspect it's data.
The vis command then launches a visualizer allowing us to examine the data
autopilot gathers.

    autopilot launch -i Qt qmlscene /path/to/file.qml
    autopilot3 vis

Select the QtQmlViewer Connection from the dropdown and presto, say hello to
the entire dbus session properties and values for our application.

## Conclusion

You've just learned how to test a form-factor-independent Ubuntu application
for the phone. But there is more information to be learned about the powers of
autopilot. Check out the links below for more documentation and help. Welcome
to the world of testing!

### Resources

  * [Official Autopilot Tutorial](https://developer.ubuntu.com/api/autopilot/python/1.5.0/tutorial-getting_started/)
  * [Autopilot API Documentation](https://developer.ubuntu.com/api/autopilot/python/1.5.0/)
  * [Autopilot SDK Helpers](https://developer.ubuntu.com/api/autopilot/python/1.5.0/ubuntuuitoolkit/)





