





# Content Hub Guide

Ubuntu (for Phone and Tablets) has a new app security model. Apps are
confined. That is, they cannot read or use the file system outside of their
own limited area. But apps naturally do need to access common content like
Pictures and Music that originates from other apps, so how do they get this
common content? And how does an app make its content available to any other
app that might be interested?

Ubuntu now provides a Trusted Helper service called the Content Hub. Its job
is to provide an API and a run time service to enable apps to share content
with and import content from other apps.

The Content Hub API is not yet final, so expect a few refinements and changes
to come along. But you can get started now, so let’s dive in.

## A few key points

  * **Content is owned**: Every piece of content is owned by one and only one app. There is no single app that owns, for example, all the pictures.

  * **Each content type has a default app**: For example, right now, the default app for pictures is the Gallery app.

  * **Apps register as a source for a content type**: This allows the system to display a list of app sources that the user can choose from. Or, an importing app can name a source app.

  * **Apps register as a destination for a content type**: The system can then display the apps that can receive this kind of content. For example, the user may want to save a picture from the web browser. The system may present a list of apps that the user picks from.

  * **Content transfer object**: A transfer has a source app, a destination app, the piece of content, and a state. The actual transfer is a state transition: When a source app is ready to export content, it sets the transfer state to Charged, which starts the transfer.

  * **ContentStore provides persistence**: By default, an imported piece of content disappears when the app ends. You can save the content so that it does not disappear with the Content Hub’s ContentStore API.

  * Source apps usually provide a selector GUI: This GUI allows the user to select the content they want.Then, focus returns appropriately to the importing app.

Let’s look at couple scenarios to get a clearer picture of how the concepts
fit together.

## An app that imports a picture from the default source

Let’s say you want an app that can import pictures from the default picture
source. Pretty simple:

  * The app tells Content Hub it wants to use the default source for pictures (currently Gallery, but our app does not care).

  * Content hub gives the importing app a Transfer object that connects it to the source app. Content Hub runs the source app’s (Gallery) callback.

  * Gallery’s callback displays its picture selection GUI, which allows the user to select a picture, at which point the Transfer object is told it is ready, and Gallery is dismissed.

  * Our receiving app detects the Transfer object is ready (from its state) and is able to import the picture.

  * Our app does something sensible with the picture, for example displaying it, and maybe using a ContentStore to save it persistently.

So Content hub is the broker between two apps. The Transfer object is given to
the exporter app and the importer app. When the exporter app sets a Transfer
object property to indicate the content is ready, the Content Hub transfers
the content (whether one piece or multiple) to the importer app.

## An app that exports its pictures

Another possibility is an app that shares its pictures (or other content) to
other apps.

  * This app registers with Content Hub as a source for pictures.

  * It implements the callback that Content Hub calls when another app wants to import.

  * The callback displays a GUI that allows the user to select content (it could skip this and just hard code a piece of content for export).

  * The call back sets a the state of the Transfer object indicating the content is identified and ready to go.

  * The importing app detects the Transfer state and imports the picture (or other content).

## App registration as source or destination

As noted, apps that export content (source apps) need to register as sources
for the content type. Also, apps can register to potentially receive specific
content types. This registration tells Content Hub about the app. How is this
registration done?

It’s done with Click package hooks. These are declared in a Click package’s
manifest.json file. Specially, the json object has a “Hooks” item that carries
the needed info. It may look like like this:

    {
    [...]
        "hooks": {
            "APPONE": {
                "apparmor": "APPONE.json",
                "content-hub": "APPONE.json",
                "desktop": "APPNAME.desktop"
            },
            "APPTWO": {
                "apparmor": "APPTWO.json",
                "content-hub": "APPTWO.json",
                "desktop": "APPTWO.desktop"
            }
        },
    [...]
    }

This shows a couple things:

  * A click package can contain more than one app. That’s why the “hooks” item, in this example, has two children: APPNONE and APPTWO. (Many click packages contain only a single app.)

  * The developer adds the “content-hub” hook. (Click packages often have only an “apparmor” and a “desktop” hook.

  * Each app that wants to declare itself as a source or destination sets the content-hub hook to equal the filename of the json file (in the app source tree) that contains the required information.

Let’s look at one of these, APPONE.json:

    {
        "source": [
            "pictures"
        ]
    }

With this, when the click package is installed, Content Hub learns that APPONE
is registered as a source (an exporter) of pictures.

## AppArmor profiles for content exchange

Yes, apps are confined by AppArmor. This means they can only access a
specified set of file system locations. Content Hub file system locations can
only be accessed by an app that runs with specific AppArmor profiles.

Using the same example, let’s take a look at the apparmor hooks for both apps,
each of which declares a filename in the app source tree:

    {
    [...]
        "hooks": {
            "APPONE": {
                "apparmor": "APPONE.json",
                "content-hub": "APPONE.json",
                "desktop": "APPNAME.desktop"
            }
      "APPTWO": {
                "apparmor": "APPTWO.json",
                "content-hub": "APPTWO.json",
                "desktop": "APPTWO.desktop"
            }
        },
    [...]
    }

Looking at APPONE.json, we may see something like this:

    {
        "policy_groups": [
            "networking",
            "content_exchange"
        ],
        "policy_version": 1
    }

The content_exchange policy group is needed for all apps that export (source
apps) and that import (destination apps).

Exporter apps also require the content_exchange_source policy group, for
example:

    {
        "policy_groups": [
            "networking",
            "content_exchange_source",
            "content_exchange"
        ],
        "policy_version": 1
    }

## Next steps

That’s a high level view of the Content Hub. For detailed API reference docs
on Content Hub, be sure to check out the API documentation on
developer.ubuntu.com. Check both the [QML](/phone/apps/qml/api) and the
[HTML5](/phone/apps/html-5/api/) sections of the website as APIs are available
for both. If you are interested in security policy groups and how app
confinement works, [here's our article](/phone/platform/guides/app-confinement/) about that.





