---
title: "Devices"
---

# Devices

Ubuntu is a free and open source OS for desktops, phones, tablets, servers and
the cloud. It can be installed on almost any device and powers millions of
desktops and servers around the world.

It has recently started to power phones and tablets: retail phones with Ubuntu
preinstalled, selected hardware (like the Nexus 4) and community ports to
other mobile devices.

## Convergence

![](../../media/devices-converged-devices.png)

Since the Ubuntu Phone announcement, Ubuntu is on track to become a convergent
OS, using the same codebase for all devices, from desktops, servers and
clouds, to phones and even smaller form factors with the arrival of
[Snappy](), a flavor of Ubuntu dedicated to “Internet things”, such as your
connected fridge or autonomous drone.

### Desktops

The desktop OS, the reason Ubuntu has been famous for the last ten years, is
ultimately going to take advantage of all the new technologies developed for
the mobile form factor: the MIR display server, confined and responsive apps,
etc. You can test that work in progress by installing [Ubuntu Desktop](http://cdimage.ubuntu.com/daily-live/current/) next, an
ISO image showcasing its current state.

[Install Ubuntu Desktop](https://www.ubuntu.com/download/desktop)

### Phones and tablets

The mobile OS can run on a wide range of devices, some of which you can
purchase preinstalled such as the BQ Aquarius Ubuntu edition, or selected
phones and tablets such as the Nexus 4 and Nexus 7 2013. The porting community
has also enabled other devices: for example, it runs beautifully on a Nexus 5.

[Install Ubuntu on your phone or tablet&nbsp;&rsaquo;](installing-ubuntu-for-devices.md)

### Beyond applications

Ubuntu is taking a step beyond the app grid, which has ruled phones and
tablets homescreens for the last decade, with a new concept: scopes. Content
and services delivered directly to the screen, without the need to open an
application, all presented in a unified and coherent style. For example, all
your music from different apps and online services, in one -on demand- place.

[Learn more about scopes&nbsp;&rsaquo;](../scopes/index.md)

### Security

Applications are confined, which means they don't have access to your data,
location, hardware and other applications data, unless you explicitely allow
them to. This makes for a very secure operating system that puts your privacy
into your hands, without undermining the applications purpose and usefuleness:
you allow them to do only what you want them to do.

[Learn more about our security policies&nbsp;&rsaquo;](https://developer.ubuntu.com/en/publish/security-policy-groups/)

## Next steps

  * [See the list of supported devices&nbsp;&rsaquo;](devices.md)
  * [Install Ubuntu on your phone or tablet&nbsp;&rsaquo;](installing-ubuntu-for-devices.md)
  * [Port Ubuntu to a new device&nbsp;&rsaquo;](porting-new-device.md)
  * [Make scopes, webapps, native and HTML5 apps with the Ubuntu SDK&nbsp;&rsaquo;](../platform/sdk/index.md)
