





# Welcome to HTML5 apps!

Ubuntu embraces HTML5 as a first-class app toolkit. While its support is
constantly evolving and you can expect a lot of new things to come, most of
the core parts are in good working order! So HTML5 developers can start making
true HTML5 applications (as opposed to web pages) that fit right into the
dazzling Ubuntu experience.

## What is an HTML5 app?

HTML5 is traditionally for web pages. CSS provides styling and animations, and
JavaScript provides logic and control. But now, these web technologies can be
used to write apps for Ubuntu.

## What is an Ubuntu HTML5 app?

It is written in HTML5, CSS and JavaScript and it runs in a web container. It
is an app, just like any other Ubuntu app, integrated into Unity in all the
usual ways. The web container provides access to a wide and growing set of
JavaScript APIs the app can use. This includes Ubuntu platform APIs such as
the Content Hub, Alarms and Online accounts and others not specific to Ubuntu,
such as Cordova APIs, which provides access to system and device level
functionality like the camera and the accelerometer.

## Looks and feels like an Ubuntu app

An HTML5 app UI can be created with Ubuntu HTML5 widgets, like Tabs, Pages,
Dialogs, Buttons, and more. When you declare these widgets in your HTML5 code,
they are automatically styled by Ubuntu CSS, so they fit right in visually.
This also includes a JavaScript runtime framework, which lets you control
widgets using a convenient JS API.

In addition to Ubuntu-specific HTML declarations, the app can use standard
HTML5. Since the Ubuntu CSS provides styling for most cases, even when using
additional HTML5, the app still looks and feels like an Ubuntu app.

## Ubuntu app design

Ubuntu puts design first and considers toolkits (HTML5, QML and others) as an
implementation detail. It is design that makes an Ubuntu app look and feel
like an Ubuntu app.

A good step before getting started writing Ubuntu HTML5 apps is looking at
[design.ubuntu.com](http://design.ubuntu.com/). You will find examples and
guidance on using Ubuntu UI layouts and building blocks (from a toolkit
agnostic viewpoint).

## Questions?

Thereâ€™s a lot to know, and fortunately the Ubuntu community is rich with
sources of help and information. Here are a couple good places to visit:

  * [http://askubuntu.com](http://askubuntu.com/), a very active site. [Check out the list of already answered questions](http://askubuntu.com/questions/tagged/html5). Feel free to ask your own questions as well and make sure you use the HTML5 tag.
  * [Our app developer community](), a great gathering place for people who share an interest in developing for Ubuntu and sharing knowledge!

## Next steps

### Guides

Be sure to check out our [HTML5 guides](/en/phone/apps/html-5/guides/) and
others, like those for the [Ubuntu App Platform](/en/phone/platform/guides/).
These focused articles cover key topics of interest to app developers and are
designed to give you a high level overview of critical topics. After reading
the guides, understanding APIs and platform features is much easier.

### Tutorials

Definitely check out the [HTML5 tutorials](/en/phone/apps/html-5/tutorials/).
These give you detailed steps, examples and explanations that let you leap
into productivity with Ubuntu HTML5 apps.

### APIs

And of course, developers need the [API Reference docs forHTML5/JavaScript](/en/phone/apps/html-5/api/). These provide the
implementation-level detail you need make your HTML5 apps use the full sweet
of platform APIs .





